participants
moderators
kelly
johnson
vargas
desantis
haley
ramaswamy
christie
fitton
holt
welker
hewitt
scott
brooks
baier
maccallum
president biden
biden
unidentified wisconsin voter #1
unidentified wisconsin voter #2
unidentified wisconsin voter #3
pence
burgum
hutchinson
diaz
unidentified male
varney
calderon
perino
tapper
bash
participants
moderators
baier
bachmann
romney
paul
cain
huntsman
gingrich
pawlenty
santorum
wallace
ferrechio
york
(unknown)
question
moderator
blitzer
audience member
lopez
rodriguez
unknown
cuevas-neunder
suzanne bass
sawyer
stephanopoulos
perry
male voice #2
romney & gingrich
announcer
male voice
mcelveen
[unknown]
rose
tumulty
goldman
ronald reagan, 40th president of the united states
cote
[applause] romney
george w. bush, president of the united states
protestor
seib
evans
williams
ebans
cooper
robert zavala, las vegas resident
vicki o'keefe, boulder city, nevada
king
unidentified male
strawn
protester
pelley
garrett
various
rick perry
senator lindsay graham
jim demint
kelly
johnson
bream
gov. rick scott, r-fla.
ed meese, heritage foundation
alison acosta fraser, former deputy director, oklahoma office of state finance
alex brill
truluck
katherine zimmerman
zimmerman
gregory
john distasos, senior political reporter, "new hampshire union leader"
distasos
distaso
hiller
harris
williams (voice-over)
r. reagan
n. reagan
ronald wilson reagan, president of the united states
diaz-balart
reinhard
smith
john marcoux, retired stock trader
marcoux
sponsor
john king, cnn anchor
david gergen, cnn senior political analyst
j. king
erick erickson, cnn contributor
gergen
erickson
rep. michele bachmann (r-mn), presidential candidate
sen. jim demint (r), south carolina
demint
rep. steve king (r), iowa
s. king
robert george, professor, princeton university
george
rep. steve king, (r) iowa
herman cain, (r) presidential candidate
prof. robert george, princeton university
sen. jim demint, (r) south carolina
newt gingrich, (r) presidential candidate
rep. ron paul (r-tx), presidential candidate
ron paul, (r) presidential candidate
john king
mitt romney, (r) presidential candidate
senator jim demint (r), south carolina
bartiromo
harwood
cramer
liesman
narrator
oberhelman
santelli
epperson
john fahey, new hampshire union leader
q
fahey
vaughn
terry pfaff, former new hampshire state senate candidate
pfaff
jean mackin, wmur
mike patinsky, director of transportation, franklin pierce college
josh mcelveen, wmur political reporter
john distaso, new hampshire union leader sr. political reporter
mackin
so, what we need to do both, from the congress and president, he needs to direct his treasury secretary
[applause] king
foreman
john brown, voter
we to this day don't yet know who the rebel forces are that we're helping. there are some reports that they may contain al qaeda of north africa. what possible vital american interests could we have to empower al qaeda of north africa and libya? the president was absolutely wrong in his decision on libya. king
diana nagy, recording artist
dr. bridget melson, pleasanton tea party
governor perry, it was president bush who pushed for prescription drug benefits for senior, not president obama. it was president bush who pushed for prescription drug benefits for seniors. the question to you
and that's what we need to be focusing on in this country, freeing up the small businessmen and women to do what they know how to do, which is risk their capital and give them half a chance to have an opportunity to have a return on that investment, and they will go risk their capital. that's what the president of the united states needs to do
but let me just say that we have put forward a plan, wolf. and i want people to take a serious look at this, because you can come up with a spin on everything -- any way to describe your plan, come up with fancy language, but i just want you to take a look at what we have done where we have been in terms of proposing job creation measures under tax reform in our state that is totally applicable to what this country needs
steve routszong, greater gaston county tea party
my question tonight is
male
sahar hekmati, tea party express
participants
host
wallace
romney
and that savings plan is this
mccain
huckabee
giuliani
question
thompson
it would do two things
i think that a person ought to be able to fill out their taxes the way that they traditionally do, if they want to, or have an alternative along the lines of the house republican plan that's been tested and it's revenue neutral that would say basically this
those are truths. we're going to have to go to the american people and say, "here's the deal. here's what we need to do. let's do what generations have done in times past
so change, it's really a question of
narrator
the rule should be like this
and when i hear a president of mexico chide us for enforcing the border, you know, i would say to him
announcer
moderators
others
hume
greer
crist
who is more conservative
he voted against $250,000 caps on damages, which they have in texas. he voted against almost anything that would make our legal system fairer
who's more conservative
let me also note, the question is -- you properly asked it, chris -- was
cameron
congressman paul, to you, on the subject of one of the core debates in the party, over social issues
paul
giulaini
tancredo
now, those are objective. you know, there's somebody else that looks at us and says
some pretty sensitive issues
hunter
goler
america has the highest quality health care in the world. our job is to preserve it. our job is to keep the costs down. last year, the medicaid inflation was 10 percent. no, no program in the world can survive under that. so of course we want to remove the employer (ootc
i want to ask you
audience
but i want to say this -- you've asked
for people 20 and 30 and 40 years old, we have four major options, for instance, for social security. one is the one democrats want
we didn't just have a bunch of bureaucrats. we had a professor from mit, an investment banker, a head of a consulting firm. we all worked on it, came up with an idea, and then we met with democrats and said
and that's been going on. and then another thing is to come up with some creative solutions. you asked
moderator
mr. blitzer
rep. tancredo
gov. thompson
sen. brownback
gov. romney
mayor giuliani
sen. mccain
gov. huckabee
rep. hunter
gov. gilmore
rep. paul
mr. fahey
mr. spradling
mr. paul
that's what we're going to have to do instead of looking at each theater one by one and saying
i want to get to senator mccain in a moment. but first, governor romney, senator mccain has accused you of flip-flopping on this issue, in effect. yesterday in miami, he said the following
sen./rep./mr.
congressman hunter, whether we like it or not, in cities across america, in counties across america, including your district in san diego, illegal immigrants are doing jobs that american citizens don't want
mr.
and the basic question was an unfair question because it simply asks us in a simplistic manner whether or not we believed - in my view - whether there's a god or not. well let me be very clear
simple question
ms. vaughn
ms. kiernan
doug hall
mr. hall
health insurance should become like homeowners insurance or like car insurance
and we said
we said
and i want one i put - i want - i have one i want to put on the line here
but let's be serious about this, you guys. we talk about all the immigration reform we want, and what it's got to get down to is this
and how long? how long will it take us for that - for us to catch up with the millions of people who have come here, both legally and illegally, and assimilate them? i'll tell you this. it'll take this long
carolyn gargasz
ms. gargasz
and when i ran for governor, i went to the moderate communities and said
panelists
mr. smiley
i've got a suggestion, though, for a way to fix it. a lot of people on the republican side say
amb. keyes
ms. rowels
and i guess i would go with jack kemp's great statement
cynthia tucker
ray suarez
mr. suarez
but you're right, what are the -- the real issue is
mr. williams
and i would say this
and that is
ms. tucker
so i don't agree with those types of stumbling blocks. but i would say this
the second step is we all know that in america these days, your ability to have access to health care depends on -- what? -- primarily
i think the question you have to ask is
today we see a decline in black and latino enlistment because of one reason
we are the greatest nation on the face of the earth, and we are ones that can stand up. and we need to stand up in the face of second genocide when we had declared years ago in rwanda
and god help the american who somehow has this cavalier attitude about the death penalty and says they support it and they can do it. let me tell you something from the person whose name had to be put on the document that started the process
and our terrific panel of journalists
washburn
keyes
so the question is
and here's why
(applause) moderator
we are a nation of laws. and you're correctly going through each part of immigration policy here. but let's underscore this one more time
i would say this
that means that the hispanic community in the united states does not agree with the idea of having open borders. they do agree with the idea of having order on the border and having a regulated system where this lady of freedom standing behind me, the statue of liberty, says
the real question is
but let me -- let me tell you -- let me tell you why -- let me tell you why we have a problem in south america and central america
governor huckabee, the same thing
my mother used to have a statement
i definitely have a different point of view, because we weren't justified in going over there. we did not declare the war. and i would say to the hispanics that believe we ought to come home, i would say
that's the question
working with people across the aisle, we said
mr. hume
mr. wallace
mr. thompson
mr. romney
mr. giuliani
mr. huckabee
mr. gilmore
however, i think that we have to have an honest discussion with the american people about this. we have to ask ourselves this question
wendell goler (fox news)
mr. goler
mr. 
but it nonetheless remains that this is a child that we're talking about doing this to, of ending the life of this child. will that make the woman in a better situation if that's what takes place? and i don't think so, and i think we can explain it when we look at it for what it is
i can tell you that i've looked at this long and hard. i've always been personally pro-life. i've taught that to others, it's been part of my faith. the question for me was
the questions in this round will be premised on a fictional, but we think plausible scenario involving terrorism and the response to it. here is the premise
it's not about the terrorists, it's about us. it's about what kind of country we are. and a fact
florida republican party chairman jim greer
charlie crist
but it's also important to understand what we're talking about
anderson cooper
gloria borger
cooper
john king
borger
cooper (voice over)
dick armey
snowman cartoon character
ufo cartoon character
actor as "the ghost of richard nixon"
sparky
schmoopsy
chris nandor (singing)
ernie nardi
michael weitz
i came to the senate not to do the easy things, but to do the hard things. mel martinez and i knew this was going to be a tough issue, but we thought the status quo was unacceptable
weitz
jack brooks
ashley
youtube question
these supporters of yours seem to think that you also believe in this theory. so my question to you is
sarah lederach
emily
so my question is
ronald lanham
governor norquist
ted faturos
and we do this together, as opposed to unilaterally saying
sen. hillary clinton
clinton
leeann anderson
jay fox
andrew fink
eric bentson
and it's time in this country that we go back to the kind of values that allow kid to have moms and dads. in the african-american community today, 68 percent of kids born are born out of wedlock. and so we're going to try and once again reinculcate in this country the try of values that have made us so strong
journey
questioner
tyler overman
joseph
our first question
yasmin
andrew jones
(unknown)
buzz brockway
sam garcia
he blatantly made this statement somewhere along the line
nick anderson as dick cheney cartoon character
gen. chuck yeager (usaf, ret.)
it's about attack ads. it's an interesting show starting at 11
brigadier gen. keith kerr (ret.)
kerr
david cercone
adam florzak
steve nielson
now, whether we need to send somebody to mars, i don't know. but i'll tell you what
david mcmillan
leroy brooks
dr. hank campbell
campbell
mark strauss
my question is for ron paul
chris krul
hook
vandehei
so a unilateral action to get ourselves off of foreign oil makes all the sense in the world. nuclear power, biodiesel, biofuel, all the renewables, liquefied coal, where you sequester the carbon dioxide -- those things make all the sense in the world. but when you put in place a new cap or a mandate and particularly if you don't have any safety valve as to how much the cost that cap might be, you would impose on the american people -- if you do it unilaterally, without involving all the world -- you'd impose on the american people a huge new effective tax
and finally -- could i just mention -- on the issue of rebates, fine, because part of this is psychological. part of the problem we have, of course, in any recession is psychological and i'm still optimistic that nothing is inevitable. i still rely on the innovation and the talent of the united states of america, but we've got to make the tax cuts permanent. we need to get rid of the alternate minimum tax. we need to give people a depreciation in one year for their -- in business and investment. we need to encourage research and development and tax credits that are associated with it. and we've got to stop the spending. we've got to stop -- one place where ron paul and i are in total agreement
mr. vandehei
but the key is this
now, in december of 2006, after the election, governor romney was asked what he thought about the surge. he said at that time
sen./mr.
audience members
diane sawyer
charlie gibson
the positions in which they sit were drawn by lot, and so let me introduce them from left to right
mr. gibson
jonathan karl, abc correspondent
gov. george w. bush, r-tx
mr. karl
after september 11, a new bush doctrine
president george w. bush
sen thompson
and i think the president got the big decision of his presidency right
the president set a whole different mindset. it was
bill clinton cut the military drastically. it was called the peace dividend, one of those nice-sounding phrases
he did the right thing in responding and reacting to the fact that we got attacked. and people now recognize
and what's at stake are the things that are best about us
and i've been attacked for using the words
bush
i laid out 12 commitments to the american people. i wrote them out. the first one is the most important
look at ronald reagan. ronald reagan had three prime goals
dr. tim johnson, abc medical editor
dr. johnson
so, i said this
but if a real health care system exists, it has three components
stay with us
... to say that they all came back
now, the reason i've come to that conclusion is for a variety of focus, but here's part of it
and i want to make final point that i think ought to happen
you give them the option
the reason that we've got to do that is that when people say we can't get a -- we don't have to, for this simple principle
senator thompson is absolutely right
so, the question is
but we also have to make sure that we're going to see a much more robust effort throughout pakistan to go after al qaida. we have these three efforts that we're talking about
candidates
former new york city mayor rudolph giuliani
those are the things that ronald reagan taught us
senator john mccain (r-ariz.)
former wisconsin governor tommy thompson
third, i would split the oil reserves
representative duncan hunter (r-calif.)
former massachusetts governor mitt romney
ronald reagan was a president of strength. his philosophy was a philosophy of strength
senator sam brownback (r-kan.)
and i'm just asking
brownback
former arkansas governor mike huckabee
former virginia governor james gilmore (r-va.)
representative ron paul (r-texas)
how did we win the election in the year 2000? we talked about a humble foreign policy
congressman tancredo, along those lines, imagine you're president of the united states and this is a likely or possible scenario, certainly plausible
representative tom tancredo (r-col.)
gilmore
the bigger, however, issue, is this
paul (?)
and the american people are the greatest people in the world. what makes america the greatest nation in the world is the heart of the american people
it's the old boy scout rule of the campsite
brownback (?)
gilmore (?)
huckabee (?)
hunter (?)
tancredo (?)
however, my record as governor of virginia, i think, has been one that the pro-life community, of which i'm a part, would be very proud
let me go to senator mccain. we're in the house of ronald reagan. every cab driver in america knew what ronald reagan stood for
i didn't hear it on george stephanopoulos. but i can tell you this
senator brownback
governor gilmore, this question comes from malika (ph) in washington, d.c.
i'd overhaul it. i would work for the fair tax, which meets the four criteria
really poorly
i think that's the heart of the republican party
governor huckabee, this question comes from a reader in new york
something you've come out for, i believe -- i want you to explain it and defend it
terri schiavo
mr. russert
now, often we hear people talk about trickle-down economics, that if you have a wonderful surge in the economy that it eventually works it way down to all sectors. but there's another issue, too
mr. tash
but i'm not going to run on the basis of bill clinton. if hillary clinton is the nominee, it's going to be hillary clinton. it's going to be her position and her postures on -- on a whole series of issues. and frankly, she is so out of step with the american people on everything from taxes -- she wants to raise taxes. she has a plan for health care. her health care plan, quite simply, is one which says, look, we're going to give health insurance to everybody by the government. it's going to cost $110 billion more every single year -- trillion-plus dollars over 10 years. her approach to the war in iraq
and so i believe that i'll ultimately get the nomination. i can't be sure of that, but i'm -- i'm pretty confident. and i believe in a head-to-head with hillary clinton the differences in our perspectives on how to get america going again and how to get us on the right track are as different as night and day. she takes her inspiration from the europe of old, big brother, big government and big taxes. i take mine from republican ideals
mayor giuliani, we're going to begin with you. in tomorrow's -- tomorrow morning's editions of the new york times, they are out with their endorsements in the new york primary
the party's getting smaller. yet they say
stephanopoulos
a weak, soft partition
yepsen
(applause) i want to stay on this subject but broaden out the conversation a little bit. and the way i want to get into it is with a bit from president bush's second inaugural address, where he made the spreading of democracy the core of his foreign policy. here's what he said
(applause) my task as president of the united states is primarily to do one thing—by the way, not to make sure everybody has health care or everybody's child is educated—my task is to do one thing
(crosstalk) paul
(applause) tancredo
(applause) and let me just say why here. we've got a problem with the current tax code and we've tried to take it out. and every time you try to take it out, everybody comes to defend it that has something in it. you can put an optional flat tax in the tax code and let people choose. and it will create economic growth. that's why 16 countries have already gone to a flat tax
(applause) we have one more round. i also want to bring all of you in on this for about 30 seconds each. and i'm going to introduce it by showing everyone something that president bush said at the iowa straw poll eight years ago. it was his fundamental promise as president. (begin video clip) bush
our work
mr. matthews
ms. bartiromo
this is just unacceptable, and therefore, everyone's going to have to come together to solve the problem. and that means from the president's standpoint, the president's going to have to stand up and say
but the reality is this
i see in the wall street journal this morning an editorial that says
mr. harwood
mr. seib
and to all my colleagues who talk about the joy of free trade, that requires one thing
mr. harwood/huckabee (?)
and i just believe this. one thing we've got to remember
let me tell you what the real answer is
in new york city, you allowed illegals to report crimes and to seek medical treatment, you said in the interests of public safety. but in fact, you went a lot further than that as mayor. back in 1994, you said the following
mr. cameron
john rogers
i recognize that for many people, that is considered an act of murder, to have an abortion. it is without question the taking of a human life, and i believe that a civilized society must respect the sanctity of a human life. but we have two lives involved here
heidi turcotte (dover, nh)
there's no question
it's working because we've got a great general. we've got a good strategy. anbar province
mark riss
the key is this
sir, i want to ask you
q
so you have to isolate -- the reaction force would be coming obviously from the iraqi side, and you would look probably at the pattern of what the israelis did with the osirak reactor that saddam hussein built back in the 1980s, when eight f-16s came over the horizon and took care of that problem. i would say this
i think you have to take the factual setting of what you've put forward, take it to the american public and to the congress, and ask for the authority to use military force for two purposes
participants
moderators
woodruff
greenfield
bush
doyle mcmanus, los angeles times
mccain
but ours is a message of inclusion. ours is a message that says
mcmanus
keyes
so you really kind of have two choices
brown
shaw
bauer
i am simply stating and will repeat
forbes
my grandfather was a penniless immigrant, as tens of millions of other americans were. what brings us together is not a single ancestry or religion or a common race. what unites us is a shared set of ideas and ideals
and why is that? why is the party of ronald reagan confused about most-favored-nation status? very simply reason
let me summarize for you what's been happening with china. they're in the middle of a massive arms buildup. they've taken technology from the united states, sold to them by american companies. we've got companies from china controlled by the people's liberation army pouring stuff in here. we've got threats on taiwan. this chinese defense minister said two weeks ago
i know this works because i've seen dramatic improvement in schools in texas by setting high standards and results. but two people have openly criticized this plan
i'm an independent outsider. the washington special interests have no hooks in me. i've got the conservative principles
russert
the first question is for governor bush. governor bush, steve forbes has an ad running on television right now which says the following
geha
albin
hatch
and that's why i said the other day what i say now
that boy's mother gave her life so that he could breathe free. and as all my colleagues said
and one of the aspects of this, of course, that we've seen is this continued consolidations and mergers within the telecommunications industry, of a size that we've seldom seen, the latest of which of course we heard announced today
joshua gabriels is a freshman here. he wants to know the following
you go back to the '60s. i remember the first headline when i was in high school
novak
hook
and in terms of principles and litmus tests, if you're going to appoint a judge for life, that judge ought to respect the sanctity of life. and that is a principle with me--if you don't respect the sanctity of life, you're not going to be appointed to the federal bench, period. and also too, and also too, i think it is very, very important that these judges understand the limitations. and the declaration of independence put it right
that by the way is not a question about guns. it's a question about our estimate of our own character, self-discipline and decency. and i think it's time we began to understand the answer is not gun control any more than it's condoms and other forms of external control. the answer is self-control, and the basis of self-control is conscience, and the basis of conscience is the acknowledgment that our founders put in the very foundation stone of this nation's life
moderator
king
there will be only two commercial breaks at 9
and one personal note
but i would also look very — revise our policies concerning these rogue states
here's the question though and the verdict on mr. putin is out. and it's this
but i don't think the united states of america right now is prepared to overturn a free and fair election. and i'll tell you what
on election day in new hampshire, thousands of young people went out, registered republican and voted and voted for me. cindy and i got on a plane, arrived at the airport in greenville at 3
i support the death penalty for this reason
williams
stanton
q
trotter
have you ever — have you ever wondered why all of the democrats love mccain-feingold and hardly any republicans do? well, think it through
and i can tell you this
brady
my question
i think it's time we got back to real conservatism
brokaw
bachman
\bauer
and he went, oh. and i said — and you could see he was very upset. and i said
griffith
question
we can work together. and my party, which is proud of its pro- life position and i am proud of it, should send the word
protester
i believe one of the things we can do to solve that is to provide educational choice for those parents. if we can give low-income parents vouchers, then they can go to that local principal and say
a matter of fact, it was considered by our founders to be one of the important functions of government
we need to make real reforms
there are many things that we can do and we need to do them now before we have a system where bureaucracy is making all of the decisions in health care
the chairman of my campaign, ken blackwell, is one of the highest elected african-american officials in america. he joined my campaign because of my belief in the new birth of freedom, whether it's getting rid of the irs as we know it, lowering -- genuinely -- taxes on people, putting patients in charge of health care, allowing younger people to have a new social security system where their taxes are invested in their own account, out of the grasping hands of washington, whether it's allowing you to chose your own doctor
i would mention another important item here that i think will help solve the immigration debate, and that is this idea that everybody coming into the country should want to become an american. they should want to learn the english language. they should want to know our traditions. we need to make a new effort as a nation to teach everyone, native-born and immigrant, the great values of america and our founding principle in the declaration of independence
the special interests rule in washington. the big money, the huge six- and seven-figure contributions that come in
the founders put in the constitution provisions that made an income tax unconstitutional
sort of a new principle of taxation
currently, the united states has about $1 billion in overdue membership dues to the united nations. this delinquency is threatening our seat on the security council and also damaging our credibility with the international community. so my question is
but you have the power of your hands to say
and oddly enough, i've been getting monies from democrats, republicans, independents saying
announcer
from the orpheum theater in downtown phoenix, here now is the moderator
judy woodruff, cnn anchor
now to the candidates
now, the candidates were introduced in the order in which they will take our questions based on a draw that was conducted earlier. my cnn colleagues and i will focus our questions on three issues which are important to the public and the presidency
candy crowley, cnn correspondent
gary bauer (r), presidential candidate
crowley
john king, cnn correspondent
gov. george w. bush (r-tx), presidential candidate
sen. orrin hatch (r-ut), presidential candidate
sen. john mccain (r-az), presidential candidate
alan keyes (r), presidential candidate
but i strongly favor one principle
now president clinton proposes to expand this program by allowing states to use unemployment benefits to provide some paid time off for parents who otherwise couldn't afford to stop working. my question is
steve forbes (r), presidential candidate
it's like going to a doctor. the doctor says
another question on the working poor
governor bush, while we are considering america's place in the world, you volunteered at last week's debate that you were now reading the biography of dean acheson. and my question is
the problem is, we should negotiate in the best interests of the united states, and it ought to be free and open world trade. woodruff
but let me make this clear to you, and to the chinese
i don't agree with the demonstrators in the street. i think they had a lot of hidden agendas. that was the left fighting battles in the '60s. but they were right about one thing
we have signed on to something that is destroying our constitutional sovereignty. do you believe that we should in fact withdraw from such illegitimate arrangements until we have renegotiated them on a more constitutional basis? bauer
i mentioned last week, i asked my wife about that, i said
(applause) woodruff
i can't do that unless we reform this broken campaign finance system. i commit to you until the last breath i draw
cokie roberts
gary bauer
sen. orrin hatch
steve forbes
senator john mccain
alan keyes
sen. john mccain
cokie roberts [others talking as well]
unidentified
[confused talking over each other] cokie roberts
when pat robertson gave his key speech to the christian coalition this year he talked about third world poverty--that was his message. again back to the bishops, they ask a question
and that is
that's why i think it is essential that we stop talking out of both sides of our mouths, stop talking about "national standards" and "what i'm gonna do when i get in there to make education this and that." i'll tell you one thing
hume
now, let me just say this to you. i do disagree with john with regard to campaign finance reform. i think true campaign finance reform is what i'm doing. today you can get everybody who's donated to me on my web page
so by the criteria that the phony folks in the media use, you are violating your own criteria. and i have to look around for another explanation when that happens. and i know that explanation from the time i stepped forward. you know, when i first stepped forward, the only thing people in the media wanted to ask me about was race. and i used to wonder why, because i was speaking to an issue far more important than that in my opinion, which is the root, in fact, of our racial difficulties
i'm sick of it. and i think the american people need to be given an opportunity to demonstrate what the folks in alabama demonstrated when i won the republican state-wide straw poll in alabama
 hume
so what i've proposed is a new system — and you'll have an investment of menu choices
my question is this
i will have to take a privilege here, though, which was offered to us at the beginning of the show because i've been listening to this tax discussion and i have got to say a word because it seems to me a lot of posturing is going on here overall on this issue, and we have all these folks — i mean, mr. bush's plan may be this, it may be that. basically it has folks running for the calculators
i believe one of the worst things we've got under the tax code is this
and that's going to be one of the pledges that i will make to you
and if we do that, i guarantee you, we'll have three things happen to us
 i'm running for president because i want to reform government. i want to reform education so that every parent in america has the same choice as the wealthy parent
distaso
attiyeh
the joint chiefs of staff have one purpose
second point, however
the clinton-gore people, they want to put a toll booth every mile on the information superhighway, which is where it is going to be at in the high-tech world, which we are leading on in this world today. and so i agree with john
george bush says we should look at his record as governor -- and this is the basis of my question -- he signed a pledge in 1994 promising not to put in a business tax or to raise the state sales tax. two years later he violated that pledge. the state of texas -- his own party threw that tax bill out. we know what happens in the republican party when we violate no-tax pledges. i want to ask you
and for those who are skeptical of the flat tax, we give you a choice
ryerson
and frankly, i think we've got to carry the ball as republicans to get it to go. i'm very concerned about some of the things that they've done. and i've gotten so concerned that i did a fireside chat of about 30 minutes that will be on channel 5 and channel 8 at 6
our first question is from richard timyer of burlington, iowa, and here's what he wrote to me
it's true
and i've got to tell you, i know ronald reagan. i helped elect him. i went to 36 states for him. and i can tell you this
unknown
my question to you is
glawe
this administration has conducted foreign policy in a feckless, photo-op way that will cause us perhaps to have to expend our most precious assets
clark
that illustrates the problem we have here
through the 14th amendment, some of these lawyers tried to pretend that the judges can do what the amendment explicitly forbids the congress from doing
participants
moderators
quick
harwood
jindal
santorum
pataki
graham
quintanilla
cramer
i would also look at what we're doing at the federal level and put in place what israel has done
and third, i'd purposely shrink the size of government. you know, that is a — that is an intentional feature of my plan. we've got a choice
unidentified male
santelli
i wanna quote you a president. our previous president said this
epperson
unidentified female
baier
kelly
wallace
cruz
now, there is a difference between personal insults and attacks — between going into the mud with ad hominems and focusing on issues and substance. cruz
rubio
bush
we always had such a loving relationship in these debates and in between and the tweets. i kind of miss him. i wish he was here. everybody else was in the witness protection program when i went after him on behalf of what the republican cause should be
christie
paul
kasich
carson
question
and the people i have been accountable to every single day in the senate are the 27 million texans who i represent and i made a promise to them that i make to you today, which is, if i am elected, every single day i will do two things
i think we ought to give ukraine offensive weapons and i think we ought to fight them on the economic basis because putin is a one- horse country
blitzer
huckabee
bash
hewitt
hannah debella, college student
hemmer
and i thought about. i said well, wait a minute, now, if there were no political considerations and i had some time because i'm not doing anything at 9
gilmore
maccallum
fiorina
now, by the way, i start there because someone asked me about midway through my campaign, what's the biggest surprise to you on the campaign trail? and i will tell you what the biggest surprise is
perry
i ran for office to make the generational changes in louisiana. we've cut 26 percent of our budget. we have 30,000 fewer state bureaucrats than the day i took office. i don't think anybody has cut that much government anywhere, at any time. as a result, eight credit upgrades; as a result, a top ten state for private sector job creation. and we fought for statewide school choice, where the dollars follow the child, instead of the child following the dollars. we've been the most pro-life state six years in a row. my point is this
so let's open this discussion about iran with this question that comes to governor perry. governor perry, here's the question for you
the second will be to the supreme leader of iran. he might not take my phone call, but he would get the message, and the message is this
the president has done an executive order with respect to illegal immigration that is illegal. illegal. and it creates a -- a contempt for the law, for the rule of law. if i were the president of the united states, i would go and look at every executive order that exists right now and determine which ones want to be voided, because the president shouldn't be legislating
unknown
muir
raddatz
trump
let me tell you the facts of what occurred for those who are interested in knowing. on monday night, about 6
i reached him the next day and apologized. he asked me then, he said, ted, would you make this apologize in public? i said, yes, i will. and i did so. i regret that subsequently, cnn reported on that — they didn't correct that story until 9
that's why he passed obamacare and the stimulus and dodd-frank and the deal with iran. it is a systematic effort to change america. when i'm president of the united states, we are going to re-embrace all the things that made america the greatest nation in the world and we are going to leave our children with what they deserve
ham
mcelveen
o'connor
we created greater regulation on abortion clinics, where there were horrific procedures. so i'm pro life, but i believe there should be exceptions
moderator
panelists
dickerson
not only a disgrace, it's a disgrace and an embarrassment. but very important, who are we fighting with? who are we fighting for? what are we doing? we have to rebuild our country. but we have to — i'm the only one on this stage that said
you said, quote
strassel
garrett
joseph stalin said if you want to bring america down you, have to undermine three things
[unknown]
here's what this election better be about
but there are several opponents on this stage who get big- applause lines in early voting states with this line
walker
you asked the chairman of the joint chiefs a question
i want to win. i want one of these people here or the ones at 5
and -- and that has put our national security at risk. if i am president, he won't think about that. you know, putin believes in the old lenin adage
i agree with what dr. carson said earlier. the first thing we need to do to make america stronger is to strengthen our military, and i put out a really specific plan
in our final moments here together, we're going to allow the candidates to offer their final thoughts. but first, we want to ask them an interesting closing question from chase norton on facebook, who wants to know this of the candidates
governor kasich, the idea — you've said this, and i want to quote you now
and we have other ways of — of utilizing our facilities and our talents as foreign aid
arrarás
i've spent my whole life fighting to defend the bill of rights and the constitution. i can tell you, for voters that care about life or marriage or religious liberty or the second amendment, they're asking the question
cavuto
bartiromo
you look at california, you look, frankly, at paris where there's a — the strictest no-gun policy of any city anywhere in the world, and you see what happens
people are upset about it. i'll tell you what else they're upset about
he launched fast and furious, illegally selling guns to mexican drug lords that were then used to shoot law enforcement officials. and i'll tell you what hillary clinton has said
we know to go ahead and shut off the supply routes, and send in our special ops at 2
audience
so the way you do it is you pass a tax plan like the tax plan i've introduced
it's tax-free — a huge advantage for our farmers and ranchers and manufacturers — and every import pays the 16 percent business flat tax. it's like a tariff, but here's the difference
and remember this — i'm credible on this for this reason
now this first graphic shows the issues that were most talked about right before those attacks and now after
but here's the best way that we're going to make america much more exceptional
and the reason is simple
by the way, the trans-pacific, if you look at the tpp, a total disaster, which, by the way, marco is in favor of, they need — it is a disaster for our country. it's trying to be approved by various people, including president obama. and i'll tell you something. the biggest problem with that is
listen, we could all understand if you write a check to a city commission because you're looking for a zoning waiver on building a building. that may be corrupt, but you could understand real estate developers doing that.cruz
cuomo
o'reilly
hannity
unidentifiable
this city now has just 700,000 citizens. there are vacant homes, one after the other after the other. crime has been rampant, and it is an outrage. and let me say to folks in the media
it is right after the defense of the freedom of speech for a reason, for clearly the founders of our nation understood and the framers of the constitution understood that you cannot have life and you cannot have liberty and cannot pursue happiness if you are not safe.rubio
baker
if you look at the history of america, there are three levers that government has had to facilitate economic growth. the first is tax reform. and as you noted, i have rolled out a bold and simple flat tax
secondly, i'll tell you about wall street
we need an executive who's been tried, has been tested, and judge the decisions that that executive makes. i don't like what the fed is doing, but i'll tell you what worries me more than anything else
and so here's the truth
and as bad as that picture is, what's even worse is that a clinton presidency will corrode the character of this nation. why? because of the clinton way
tapper
dinan
so ask yourself at home
mr. trump, some of your republican critics have expressed concern about comments you have made praising authoritarian dictators. you have said positive things about putin as a leader and about china's massacre of pro-democracy protesters at tiananmen square, you've said
i've been told, "no,
we need to be on a war footing. we need to understand that our nation is in grave danger. you know, what the muslim brotherhood said in the explanatory memorandum that was discovered during the holy land foundation trial was that, "they will take advantage of our pc attitude to get us. 
josh jacob, college student
this is a difference between being a governor and being in a legislature. see, because when something doesn't work in new jersey, they look at me, say
but i will tell you this
and i will tell you this
???
syria's a mess. you look at what's going on with isis in there, now think of this
here's what you're gonna see in the next few weeks
trump(?)
cruz(?)
(unknown)
but here's what happened
but i will say this
here's the way forward
that's why i'm missing votes. because i am leaving the senate, i'm not running for re-election, and i'm running for president because i know this
the real issue — the real issue is not what are people using to commit violence, but why are they committing the violence? and here's the truth
male
tapper(?)
two things
regan
smith
this series of debates is essentially a job interview with the american people. and in any job interview, you know this
and i'll tell you what a weakness is of this country
they're concerned that washington is so dysfunctional it is holding them back. there are lids on people's aspirations. think about it
governor huckabee, who is here on the stage, has said that you and others who think this way are trying to rob seniors of the benefits that they've earned. it raises the question
and bernie sanders will tell them that it's because of the rich. well, i'll tell you something
[unknown
you want to talk about what we're going to be up against next year? i'm the only guy on this stage — you know, everybody has an "only guy" — "i'm the only guy this; i'm the only guy that." well, let me tell you one thing that i am the only guy
we've laid out a national energy plan that says that we should invest in all types of energy. i will tell you, you could win a bet at a bar tonight, since we're talking about fantasy football, if you ask who the top three states in america are that produce solar energy
we need to make sure that we do everything across all kinds of energy
[unidentified]
[unidentified
seib
unidentified
participants
moderators
williams
clinton
so i think that it's clear what i would do if it were someone in my campaign, as i have in the past
obama
russert
based on that, and which you're now expressing your discomfort with it, in the debate that al gore had with ross perot, al gore said the following
on sunday, the headline in your hometown paper, chicago tribune
but, you know, be very clear
johns
blitzer
edwards
i hope that we could do it through spending, and here's why
malveaux
but she has proposed nothing about how we're going to create revenue to keep social security alive and talked about fiscal responsibility. here's the problem
so the bottom-line question really is
blitzer (?)
(unknown)
here's the policy question
we do well in the big urban areas. the question is
it is dr. king's birthday. the three of us are here in large measure because his dreams have been realized
morales
audience member
the issue for the voters here in nevada, south carolina and then all of the states to come is who is ready on day one to walk into that oval office knowing the problems that are going to be there waiting for our next president
and what i want to do is to get the best experts around the table and make a determination
you know, barack has one of his biggest supporters in terms of funding, the exelon corporation (nyse
senator obama, a difference in this campaign
that energy bill was described by numerous publications, quote, "the big winner
i think that we have to, you know, break the lock of the special interests. that's why i've proposed a strategic energy fund (tsx
but a reality check
but let's be clear
but on the eve of the new hampshire primary, you said this
what i said to musharraf is
thirty seconds from all of you to answer the following from jim milton of california
and, you know, i asked myself two big questions
mcmanus
sen. obama
it is true we've got a policy difference because my view is that the reason people don't have health care -- and i meet them all the time
cummings
now, first of all, i dispute that there are 15 million people out there who don't want it. i believe that there are people who can't afford it and if we provide them enough subsidies, they will purchase it, number one. number two
and it's also important to recognize that right now there are people who could afford health care. and they're not all young; they're people who just don't feel they have to accept that responsibility. there are many states which give families the option of keeping children up till 25 on their policies, but their rates of uninsurance are still very high. we cannot get to universal health care -- which i believe is both a core (democratic/democratic ?) value and an imperative for our country -- if we don't do one of three things
this is from kim millman (sp) from burnsville, minnesota. and she says
that is something he is trying to push, and we are pushing legislation to prevent him from doing that. he has taken the view that i find absolutely indefensible
and he asks
and get this
mr. blitzer
ms. brown
sen. clinton
senator obama. sen. obama
mr. 
sen. edwards
sen. biden
mr. roberts
sen. dodd
gov. richardson
rep. kucinich
this is a -- this is critical. i always say this is the single most important issue. i've been asked the question, over 26 years in the senate, 1,000 times. it's a very difficult question to answer
and something else we've forgotten
so, where we are today means that we have to say to president musharraf
ms. malveaux
christopher jackson
catherine jackson
jeannie jackson
and also, i'd like to say to bill richardson
khalil khan
but in addition to that, the racial profiling that you're describing has to be stopped, and it will be stopped when i'm president of the united states. and we're going to take the steps that need to be taken to restore america's moral leadership in the world, and that means a whole group of things
q
judy bagley
ms. bagley
but understand, this is the top 6 percent, and that is not the middle class. (cheers, applause.) mr. blitzer
lashannon spencer
ms. spencer
frank perconte
i'm going to answer your question specifically on the middle east. number one, i would have a middle east peace envoy. this president's the only president that hasn't had one. i would base a middle east settlement on a two-state solution
moderator
george stephanopoulos
stephanopoulos
and the first one is
dodd
biden
richardson
gravel
in the case of pakistan, the truth of the matter is
karl rove
here's what i believe
but here's what i believe
and, george, we need -- and there's a fundamental question here
the fact of the matter is
kucinich
yepsen
but the answer to the question is
question
the question seems to have been, on past trade agreements like nafta
i also have a one-point plan, like i do on iraq, on no child left behind
i'll give you another one
and all we get are the same old nostrums, that we need competition in education. stop and think
and so, there's only two venues for change
wolf blitzer
mr. gravel
mr. edwards
mr. spradling
this is what i would do
mr. fahey
sen./rep./mr. 
several candidates
sen. 
the question is this
jennifer vaughn (wmur-tv)
ms. vaughn
ms. kilminster
paulie kern
matthew masur
mr. masur
mr. vaughn
brian sealander
mr. sealander
they're trying to save for their own retirement. in some cases, they're looking after an aging parent. gas prices are hitting them. and one of the things that we've seen in our economy is that the burdens and benefits of this new global economy are not being spread evenly across the board, and that's why as the next president one of my first priorities is to make sure that we institute some fairness in the system
just a quick idea
mr. camann
ivy merrill
ms. merrill
we have huge issues here at home. we've talked about some of them tonight
panelists
mr. smiley
crecilla cohen scott (bowie, md)
mr. dodd
ms. scott
mr. wickham
ms. martin
mr. navarrette
we have a huge responsibility. as president, i would make one person -- a very high-level, competent person in the white house -- responsible for reporting to me every day on what he did in new orleans yesterday -- (applause) -- and then i'll say the next day
we have to do several things
audience members
gibson
senator obama
senator clinton
so i put the question to both of you
senator clinton, when bill richardson called you to say he was endorsing barack obama, you told him that senator obama can't win. i'm not going to ask you about that conversation. i know you don't want to talk about it. but a simple yes-or-no question
and so there are two important points
nash mccabe (latrobe, pennsylvania)
mandy garber (pittsburgh, pennsylvania)
so you'd give the same rock-hard pledge, that no matter what the military commanders said, you would give the order
and secondly, we've got to deter other countries from feeling that they have to acquire nuclear weapons. you can't go to the saudis or the kuwaitis or uae and others who have a legitimate concern about iran and say
senator john mccain (r-az)
two-part question
mr. williams
mr. russert
tim, we're here in philadelphia, the birthplace of democracy. i want to know when this democratic congress is going to stand up for the constitution and hold the president accountable with article ii, section 4
what is the greatest threat to the united states of america
one last point i want to make
and the question is, what are we going to do for our children? i mean, are -- i'll say this to every voter who's watching this debate
and the irony is rudy -- rudy giuliani, probably the most underqualified man since george bush to seek the presidency -- (laughter, scattered applause) -- is here talking about any of the people here. rudy giuliani. i mean, think about it. rudy giuliani. there's -- there's only three things he mentions in a sentence
but i think there's something else. and we've talked a lot about being straight with people tonight. i think it's really important -- every four years, the presidential candidates roll through iowa and new hampshire, promise this, promise that, promise this. here's the truth. we need to ask americans to be patriotic about something other than war. and i want to be the president who says to america
one
two
so people are asking, then, what's the difference between democrats and republicans? tim, my candidacy is a candidacy which will protect the interests of main street
i will say it one more time
i think the things that we need to do specifically
the question to you is
sen. biden (?)
charles gibson, abc
brian ross, abc chief investigative correspondent
and after six years of trying, the united states has yet to capture the man who says it is his religious duty to get nuclear weapons
ross
mr. gibson
abc business correspondent betsy stark
ms. stark
now, what i would say this
my point is this
the point is this
terry mccarthy, abc baghdad correspondent
so what we need to do -- and let me be very specific -- and this is what i will do as president
and what i'd like to get is to this
my question to you is simply this
i don't mean to interrupt, but i remember you as energy secretary coming to boston for an energy summit way back in february of 2000, when the dialogue then was very similar to the dialogue that it is now
teddy roosevelt -- just one quick example -- teddy roosevelt -- teddy roosevelt, a great american president
and i'll tell you who's paying the price for those cocktail parties
under my plan
think about that for a minute
obama (?)
but, overall, actually, here's an area where i agree with hillary
there is going to be a fundamental difference between the republican nominee and the democratic nominee
mr. ramos
mr. king
now, in addition, there are steps i would take immediately. one is on this foreclosure crisis. i have been saying for nearly a year we had to crack down on the abusive practices of the lenders. but we also need a moratorium on home foreclosures. everywhere i go, i meet people who either have been or are about to lose their home -- 85,000 homes in foreclosure in texas, 90,000 in ohio. i've met the families
we need comprehensive immigration reform. i have been for this. i signed on to the first comprehensive bill back in 2004. i've been advocating for it. tougher, more secure borders -- of course. but let's do it the right way
and finally, we need a path to legalization to bring the immigrants out of the shadows, give them the conditions that we expect them to meet
but there are differences between us, and i think in our efforts to draw those contrasts and comparisons we obviously try to let voters know how we see the world differently. and i do offer solutions. that's what i believe in and what i have done, and it's what i offer to voters because it's part of my life over the last 35 years
you know, a few months ago i was honored to be asked, along with senator mccain, as the only two elected officials to speak at the opening of the intrepid center at brooke medical center in san antonio, a center designed to take care of and provide rehabilitation for our brave young men and women who have been injured in war. and i remember sitting up there and watching them come in
stay with cnn on march 4th for complete coverage of the primary results in texas, ohio, vermont, rhode island. i'm campbell brown in austin. this debate will be broadcast in spanish later tonight on the univision television network. it'll air at 11
candidates
brian williams
sen. hillary rodham clinton
senator biden, same question to you, which is
sen. joseph r. biden jr.
and the real question is
sen. barack obama
former sen. john edwards
but i think that the real question before us
rep. dennis j. kucinich
gov. bill richardson
sen. christopher j. dodd
former sen. mike gravel
in the senate, let them filibuster it. and let reid call up every -- at 12
david stanton
and yet i want to read you a quote from the political journalist roger simon
senator dodd, while you represent the nutmeg state in the u.s. senate, you may be the most washington of all the people from washington on this stage here tonight
but the broader issue here is
senator clinton, a question for you
senator biden, the kind of flip side of the question i just asked senator clinton
but the one thing that's clear
senator edwards, you have said you would raise taxes to pay for a health care plan. the question is
stanton
hillary mentioned earlier, this is going to be a change election. people are hungry for change. and the question is
this is from paula in conway, south carolina
but let me point out to you, in one sentence, you know
one instance
senator gravel, same question
senator clinton, a friend of yours from back home, said this week
another quote
second "show of hands" question
senator edwards, same question
that being the response, congressman, perhaps it's an appropriate question
i think if you ask yourself that question, you come to the conclusion that i hope most americans would
but one thing that i do have to go back on, on this issue of terrorism
keith olbermann
mr. olbermann
now, the time to talk about infrastructure is a little bit late after katrina; it's a little bit late after the bridge has fallen in minneapolis, but i've been there, and i understand the implication. why do you need an infrastructure? you need an infrastructure so you can create a basis for jobs. i want a new american manufacturing policy, where the maintenance of steel, automotive, aerospace and shipping is seen as vital for our national security. and i want to see america take a new direction in trade as part of this, and that means it's time to get out of nafta and the wto -- (cheers) -- and have trade -- and have trade -- and have trade that's based on workers right
you know, one of the things that labor does and i've always admired is you listen to the speeches that are given, but one of the things you've always wanted to know
senator edwards, china
but understand this, keith
deborah hamner (sago miner widow)
shirley brown (chicago hospital worker)
jim mcgovern (former maytag worker and iraq war veteran)
steve skvara (retired steel worker)
jorge mulasano (hotel worker)
mr. mulasano
barbara janusiak (intensive care nurse)
number two
number three
robert flynn (insulator)
continuing the lightning round, senator clinton, this past saturday you defended taking money from lobbyists, and the quote was this
carolyn washburn, editor, des moines register
first, let's welcome our candidates
washburn
sen. barack obama, d-ill.
gov. bill richardson, d-n.m.
sen. joseph r. biden jr., d-del.
and i'll just put it in real stark terms
sen. christopher j. dodd, d-conn.
former sen. john edwards, d-n.c.
sen. hillary rodham clinton, d-n.y.
but the point is this
but prevention is going to be the key. you mentioned medicare
but also i think in any future trade agreement we've got to specify that every nation that we trade with and have a trade agreement has to follow international core labor standards
but if you look at what's happened with american trade policy -- you asked about china a few minutes ago. look at what america got
you know, i think it's important for us to look at the entire context here. you know, you have winners and losers from trade right here in iowa
but the bottom line is
you know, you'd think you'd see a farmhouse every, you know, 800 acres or so. but the irony is, this is all about
i want to have the last two 30-second candidate statements. the next two
one of the things i try to do in this campaign is to talk about positive ideas and also about results here. because i think iowans, like other americans, want to know not only what you're going to do, but give us some sense of confidence and optimism that you've got a record of actually achieving ideas that brings people together
and i would start early
one of the things that i want to do is get parents reengaged in instilling a sense of excellence in their children. and i've said this all across the country when i talk to parents about education
but the answer i've given a thousand times is education. it's the key to everything who we are
i think people deserve to know the truth
so i will begin to end the war in iraq and bring all of our troops home. i will send bipartisan emissaries around the world with a very simple message
and along came president bush. he's used them as essentially a from of veto. he did it through a piece of legislation i passed, where it was pretty simple. i said
and unfortunately, the president, just as he was able to convince some of my colleagues here to vote for the war against iraq, despite the fact there wasn't any real evidence, so he has been able to get some of my colleagues here -- senators clinton, obama and edwards -- to say of iran
sen. joseph i. lieberman, i-conn.
and i think that we have two different ways of approaching this. our goals are the same
and he put it this way
mdoerator
is any of you willing to state frankly that, if you do what you're talking about, getting tough on the currency, cracking down on what senator dodd called slave labor, taking other steps, that americans are going to pay more for consumer goods at wal-mart (nyse
now, could there potentially be some higher costs on the front end? probably, but i guarantee you, i don't meet a single worker in iowa who's been laid-off who says, i wouldn't rather pay a little bit more for sneakers at wal-mart (nyse
if we are saying to china, raise your labor standards, that will, over time, improve the lot of chinese workers, as well as u.s. workers. and that's what we should be looking at, is
and i think there are a variety of things that are contributing to that. and the great issue facing the next president -- and it will be facing me as president -- is
like the -- i'll give a specific example
the question is
but you raised the question -- the question is
critics of that will say
and so we need to reach out and education is the way to do it. let's have our children learn languages and let's grow our economy in a confident way
(unknown). 
allison king (new england cable news)
secondly, those that knowingly hire illegal workers need to be punished. third, a foreign policy relationship with mexico where you say to mexico
king
and number two, these guys -- these -- anyway. (laughter.) ms. king
i said -- i walked in here this evening, and a fellow walked up to me and he said, "anderson cooper, what's happened to you here?" (laughter.) so i realized i have some gaining of ground to do here, but nonetheless, i'm counting on the american people. democrats make a good choice in the coming months, not the president of the united states predicting the winner in the democratic primary. mr. russert
mr.
senator clinton, would you be in favor of a national law to ban smoking in all public places? senator clinton
mr. cooper
we have congress and the president with, like, a 30 percent approval rating, so clearly we don't think they're doing a good job. what's going to make you any more effectual, beyond all the platitudes and the stuff we're used to hearing? i mean, be honest with us
davis fleetwood (groton, massachusetts)
cooper
reverend
my question for all the candidates
we just heard a white house spokesman, tony snow, excuse the fact that the iraqi legislature went on vacation for three weeks because it's hot in baghdad. well, let me tell you
and, thirdly, the fact of the matter is, the very thing everybody's quoting is the very legislation i wrote in january. it said
i happen to agree that there is no military solution, and the iraqis refuse to pursue the political solutions. in fact, i asked the pentagon a simple question
the answer to your question, ma'am, is
this is what i stand for
what did all these people die for? what are they dying for right now in iraq every single day? let me tell you
but i think the question is -- the question is
i've been very clear
my point is
my question is
my question is for everyone
announcer
my question to the candidates
there are two solutions, both of which are politically unpopular
(singing)
so my question is this
now, about senator gravel
the fact is, is that the latino community in the united states not only is the fastest-growing minority group, but it also embodies the best of american aspirations
you know, i grew up in a small town in north carolina, and my dad worked in mills all his life. and we went to that town so that my father could work hard and try to build a better life for myself and my -- my family, just as millions of latino families are trying to do today. in fact, that small town is now half latino, in rural north carolina. and those latino families that came to robbins, north carolina, came there for the same reason my father came there
else coming before the congress will say next week will in any way undermine the basic problem
the next question is for senator gravel. osama bin laden just reappeared in a video warning that the u.s. is vulnerable still. just two days away from the sixth anniversary of 9/11 the question is this
we want to go to senator dodd. the question
now, senator dodd, why did you vote in favor of the wall? why not in canada? sen. dodd
also, another question for you, senator dodd. what will you do with latin america? sen. dodd
but a fundamental shift has to happen in the federal role in education. it's called no child left behind. i would scrap it -- (cheers, applause) -- because this is what it does
what we also need to do is find universal education, a dream act for college students. and i have a plan that deals with college loans
we also have to lower medicare from 65 to 55 and over. for all veterans
but if -- but if i can, i want to go back to your original question, which was, why don't we have universal health care? there's a very simple reason
this is a wonderful opportunity today of empowering the hispanic community in this country by just what univision is doing here, participating for the first time in this presidential debate here. letting people know they can be directly involved in whatever their ambitions and dreams may be. that's the uniqueness of america, that you can dream and your dreams ought to be able to come true. regardless of your ethnicity, regardless of where you're from, you ought to be able to fulfill whatever that dream and ambition is, and hispanics ought not to be denied any of those opportunities because of their ethnicity in our country. (applause.) moderator
participants
moderators
woodruff
griffith
bradley
gore
and then i think it's very important to — when you get to elementary and secondary, that the biggest thing that the federal government can do in the next decade, is to try to put 600,000 new, qualified teachers in classrooms in this country, and 2,000 after-school programs for kids, so between 3
but if you want to know what my position is, you can look at the record and you can hear me right now — and not just here, but in every speech that i have made
my worst behavior on the basketball court, i suppose, was occasionally holding john havlicek when i played the boston celtics. and actually, i knew i was doing pretty well in new hampshire about six months into the campaign when some person came up to me and said — gave me a bumper sticker and it said
to you, vice president gore, senator fred thompson, republican, senator joe lieberman, democrat, have both suggested that the campaign finance scandals of the clinton-gore administration in 1996 were the worst since watergate. chinese army officials, other foreign officials, invited to coffees at the white house; the buddhist temple incident; the lincoln bedroom virtually auctioned off. my question is
now, in iowa, senator bradley asked the question
moderator
shaw
rev. al sharpton
q
greenfield
tumulty
edwards
but i'll tell you this
(unknown
here's what he said that he thinks needs to be done. he says that you — you've got to put a lot more emphasis in the training of law enforcement officers on this question
i represented new jersey, second highest per capita income in the country, but five of the poorest places. i would do town meetings in newark, jersey city, and african-american parents would come up to me and say, our school is a disaster
and i said, well, you ought to join the school board. they'd look at me like i just descended from mars. they'd say, wait a minute, we join the school board — we can't. we go to work at 6
be sure to follow full coverage of the michigan and arizona primary returns tomorrow night beginning at 8
brown
in this country we ought to be able to cover people with health insurance. there are 45 million people without health insurance this year
and you asked how is this going to happen. we both have ideas of what should happen
second, people in finance, in business, in religion and in academic life have to step forward and say the current system is not working
the key priority is to make sure that there is a good teacher in every classroom. and one of the things that i propose in this campaign is a combination of scholarship and loan forgiveness that would create 60,000 new teachers every year going into urban and rural school districts across this country to help those school districts meet the needs of their students
and my question is very straightforward
kilgore
we have two challenges. one is to clean up that which has already been polluted
i think that there's a bit of an ethic here, and that is
and st. peter met them at the gate, and he asked the first one
and he asked the second one
and he asked the third one
so st. peter hesitated and then said
and after doing that for two years, i made the decision that i thought that i was the person that could improve the quality of life for millions of americans, that the ability matched the national moment, and therefore, i was going to step forward and run for president of the united states
because there was a little network called darpanet in the pentagon, and i did take the lead in the congress in providing funding for the people who created what later became the internet
unknown male
well, there's only time for me to say that tomorrow night on this stage judy woodruff and tom griffith will host the republican town meeting at 8
jennings
distaso
king
attiyeh
both of us have proposed the same goal
the problems i have with the proposal you have made is that they hurt some people who have benefits from programs like medicaid and medicare. we talked about how -- and i have a list of every one of those federal employee plans here -- you can look for yourselves -- there's not a single one where you would lose medicaid and be able to buy into it. and on medicare you said that in '93 medicare was six years away from bankruptcy. well, because of the changes we made it's now 15 years away from bankruptcy. but 15 years is not that long, when we are facing a doubling of the senior population. i devoted $374 billion to the solvency of medicare. you have not devoted one penny to ensuring the solvency of medicare. and my question to you is
on your issue of stay and fight, i mean quite frankly i've been out talking to people in the country the last two years, and quite frankly they think a lot of people in washington stay too long and fight too much. and i look at this and i say, what is leadership in this country? leadership is taking a big national problem -- like fdr did, like lbj did -- and turning it into a public issue, and then engaging in idealism of the american people to make it happen. that is leadership. we both have experience. the question is
panelists
from cnn.com
brownstein
mayor richard riordan, los angeles
and i asked him
he said
i said
he says
and tomorrow night from the same location, the republican presidential candidates debate, moderated by judy woodruff at 9
o'brien
smiley
[unsolicited question
i think we are — unless you are a native american, or unless — who was here at the beginning, or an african american who was brought against your will — we are all immigrants in this country. and because we are immigrants, that's the best of what we have as a country. and quite frankly, if i was elected president of the united states, my wife would be the first immigrant first lady of the united states. so i think immigration is what we are. as a country it should be celebrated. it adds dynamism to our society, and we should never lose sight of that fact. [applause] smiley
but i do know one thing
russert
vice press. gore
[videotape, december 16, 1999]
senator john mccain (republican, arizona; presidential contender)
koppel
now in answer to your question, patients' bill of rights
we have been very careful not to tip our hand to either taiwan or mainland china in saying
but if you use the word "soul" in a deeper and broader sense, i think that all elections for president in this country are about our nation's soul
if we look out around us and see that we're in an information age where knowledge and learning is more important than ever before, we have to recognize that it says a lot about who we are as a people if we're willing to say to all the young people
audience member
and each time that occurred, somebody came to me and they said
that's our report for tonight. sunday's on abc's the week, cokie roberts sits down for the first interview with the two women who know governor george w. bush best
ryerson
i learned a lot of values there
one of the questions we received is from margaret rooney from des moines. and here's what she wrote to me
here's an agriculture question from david schoenbaum, who lives in iowa city. he writes
and that's why i have suggested that we have twice-weekly debates, and instead of depending on these 30-second television ads and 60-second television ads, let's depend on debates like this one. maybe the next one could be on agriculture. i know that you have said no, but as they say on that millionaire show
ask yourself this question
i would increase dramatically the number of after-school programs that are available to children in this country between the hours of 3
and here's — to your questioner, here's what changed my attitude
as you know, the u.s. census bureau has reported that, for every dollar a man makes a woman makes something like 73 cents. kathy neale of ankany is president of the business and professional women of iowa. and she asks
participants
moderators
tapper
bash
lemon
harris
biden
de blasio
protestor
bennet
inslee
gillibrand
gabbard
castro
yang
booker
unknown
so, mr. president, let's get something straight
because the bottom line is this
and importantly, we've done this
think about this
so i hope you will consider going to jayinslee.com and joining this effort. and i will close with this
so we must defeat him and then, in turning the page, write the next chapter for our country. and that has to be written in a way that recognizes what wakes people up at 3
stephanopoulos
ramos
davis
muir
it's great to be here at tsu, home of the tigers. you know, on january 20, 2021, at 12
there will be life after donald trump. but the truth is that our problems didn't start just with donald trump, and we won't solve them by embracing old ideas. we need a bold vision
klobuchar
o'rourke
buttigieg
but here's what you don't get
sanders
warren
so let me start with an issue that is causing a lot of division in this country
protesters
maddow
mitchell
we have to establish the principle
but i want to add one more part based on today's testimony, and that is, how did ambassador sondland get there? you know, this is not a man who had any qualifications, except one
and i think it is very, very important that we have a president that's going to put our country first. i was thinking about this when i was at the carter presidential museum. and on the wall are etched the words of walter mondale when he looked back at their four years, not perfect. and he said this
i'm running to be the president for that day the sun comes up and the trump presidency is behind us, which will be a tender moment in the life of this country. and we are going to have to unify a nation that will be as divided as ever and, while doing it, address big issues that didn't take a vacation for the impeachment process or for the trump presidency as a whole
secondly, i found out that vladimir putin doesn't want me to be president. so i -- i've learned a lot about these things early on from these hearings that -- that are being held. but the bottom line is, i think we have to ask ourselves the honest question
because what it means, when i watch this, is that there are clearly two different set of rules for two different groups of people in america
welker
parker
steyer
i would make this the number-one priority of my foreign policy, as well. we can do this and create literally millions of good-paying union jobs across this country. i would make sure that my climate policy was led by environmental justice and members of the communities where this society has chosen to put our air and water pollution, which are low-income black and brown communities. and when we ask, how are we going to pull this country together, how about this
so if you're a parent, you've had this thought. maybe you've been afraid to express it. and it is this
we need to create a new way forward for our people. if you want to join us in rewriting the rules of the 21st century economy, go to yang2020.com and make it so that we can look our kids in the eyes and say to them, and believe it
my entire career has been spent having one client and one client only
speaker #1
lindsey
hernandez
sexton
just like instead of building new prisons, we build new rehabilitation centers. we have to make sure that we have a window at the treasury department that allows entrepreneurs who are black and brown and minorities to be able to get loans to be able to start businesses. you know, if you own a house, i know you do know, if you own a house in an all black neighborhood, same exact house in all white neighborhood, exact same shape, the house valued in the black neighborhood would be valued as worth less, making it difficult for you to accumulate wealth, as my friend at the end of the line here says. so here's the deal
look, i think the way we build a democracy going forward is not billionaires reaching in their own pockets or people sucking up to billionaires. the way we build it going forward is we have a grassroots movement funded from the grassroots up. that's the way i'm running this campaign. if you think it's the right way to run a campaign, to go elizabethwarren.com and pitch in $5, because understand this
dwyer
scott
holt
guthrie
diaz-balart
hickenlooper
swalwell
williamson
todd
woodruff
and i would make this case
here's the good news
that is what this presidential election is about. it is what my campaign is about
the biggest problem in our economy is simple
alberta
but what i know is this
nawaz
alcindor
as an american, i never again want to see the american president looked at that way by the leaders of the world. the world needs america right now. but it can't be just any america. it has to be one that is actually living up to the values that make us who we are
the reality is that there's a lot more to the relationship with china than who's selling more dishwashers. yes, we need a much smarter trade policy. we also have to acknowledge what's going on over there
check out my website, amyklobuchar.com. i have the five r's of our foreign policy, about reasserting our values, rejoining international agreements, like the iranian nuclear agreement. but it all comes down to one r
o'donnell
king
announcer
bloomberg
what we need to do is to do what every other major country on earth does
whitaker
garrett
brennan
this president just likes to do tweets at 4
blitzer
phillip
pfannenstiel
i think right now what we should be talking about, though, wolf, is what is happening right now with donald trump. donald trump is taking us pell-mell toward another war. we have a very important resolution. we just found out today that four republicans are joining democrats to go to him and say
so i would say to you this
and i am the one person on this debate stage, on the first night of the very first debate, when we were asked what we saw as the biggest threat to our world, i said china on the economy, but i said iran, because of donald trump. because i feared that exactly what happened would happen
but here is the issue. tom steyer made the point a moment ago. we are now spending twice as much per person on health care as do the people of any other country. that is insane. in some cases, 10 times more for prescription drugs. why is that? why is that? and the answer is
ladies and gentlemen, we are in a position right now where we have to remember who we are
bullock
look, i'm a pro-choice, pro-union, populist democrat who won three elections in a red state. not by compromising our values, but by getting stuff done. that's how we win back the places we lost
delaney
ryan
right now, we have a dysfunctional health care system
senator sanders, you said this in 2013, just months after the sandy hook massacre, and i quote here
it is time for us to start over with people who have not taken donations from any of those corporations and can say with real moral authority
look at the story of detroit, this amazing city that we're in. this city is turning around because the government and the private sector are working well together. that has to be our model going forward. we need to encourage collaboration between the government, the private sector, and the nonprofit sector, and focus on those kitchen table, pocketbook issues that matter to hard-working americans
but here's the good news
calderon
so let's begin with the most important issue right now
so the word has got to go out, and i certainly would do this as president
question
cooper
burnett
lacey
it starts out feeling like a happy thought; this particular brand of chaos and corruption will be over. but really think about where we'll be
and let's be clear. what donald trump has done, because of that phone call with erdogan, is basically giving 10,000 isis fighters a "get out of jail free" card. and you know who the winner is in this? there are four
but also, in the places that i grew up in, we weren't exactly looking for another reason for cops to come banging on the door. and you all saw a couple days ago what happened to atatiana jefferson in fort worth. a cop showed up at 2
but here's the real question i believe you should be asking is
and i still remember being there at his ranch. john and i went to visit him and cindy when he was dying. and he pointed to some words in his book, because he could hardly talk. and the words says this
what hasn't changed
look, i'll support whoever the democratic nominee is. but understand this
but i want to say this
jackson
hauc
ralston
joe said it right
number two, when it comes to immigration reform, the things that you are referring to, that official that you are referring to was supported by about half the democrats, including someone in this room. and i will say this
look, for me, i am -- of all the people on this stage, i have been a politician the shortest time, but i've been the one out fighting for families the longest time. i promise you this
protestors
bottom line here
participants
moderators
woodruff
ifill
clinton
sanders
we turn now to the first of several questions from our partners at facebook. they were selected from a curated group of people we've been following of undecided voters. the first comes from claudia looze, a 54-year-old woman who works as a program manager at a public affairs cable network in madison, wisconsin. and she writes
todd
maddow
the rules tonight, by the way, are simple
so there are three big lifts that you've talked about
cooper
question
lemon
chafee
webb
o'malley
today, the scientific community is virtually unanimous
i've traveled across our country over the last months listening and learning, and i've put forward specific plans about how we're going to create more good-paying jobs
senator sanders, you voted against the brady bill that mandated background checks and a waiting period. you also supported allowing riders to bring guns in checked bags on amtrak trains. for a decade, you said that holding gun manufacturers legally responsible for mass shootings is a bad idea. now, you say you're reconsidering that. which is it
senator sanders did vote five times against the brady bill. since it was passed, more than 2 million prohibited purchases have been prevented. he also did vote, as he said, for this immunity provision. i voted against it. i was in the senate at the same time. it wasn't that complicated to me. it was pretty straightforward to me that he was going to give immunity to the only industry in america. everybody else has to be accountable, but not the gun manufacturers. and we need to stand up and say
bash
(unknown)
wilkins
lopez
o'malley (?)
jim webb is right
what you have to ask yourself is
my mission as president will be to raise incomes for hard-working middle-class families and to make sure that we get back to the basic bargain i was raised with
moderator
panelists
blitzer
the reason that our campaign has done so well is because we're doing something very radical
louis
audience member
so here is the issue
raddatz
muir
the secretary is right
so what i say to those people who go to donald trump's rallies, understand
no. we now finally are where we need to be. we have a strategy and a commitment to go after isis, which is a danger to us as well as the region... sanders (?)
announcer
and let me be clear
so if we're going to be talking like this, we can -- and maybe we can score some political points -- but the fact is
levesque
mcelveen
cuomo
sean collison
collison
alexis kulash, drake university student
alexis
unidentified male
crawford
it just seems to me that the crises that we face as a country today, and we didn't even get into climate change to a significant degree
joy lassen
lassen
jenna bishop
bishop
arnold woods
deborah plummer
plummer
and that i am the only - i am the only one of the three of us who has a track record not of being a divider, but of bringing people together to get meaningful things done
so i have a really long history of taking on all kinds of inequality. and when i went to beijing in 1995 and said human rights were women's rights and women's rights were human rights that was a statement about inequality
dick goodson
goodson
brett rosengren
rosengren
holt
president obama came to office determined to swing for the fences on health care reform. voters want to know how you would define your presidency? how would you think big? so complete this sentence
google searches for the words, "black lives matter" surpassed, "civil rights movement". and, here in south carolina, "black lives matter" was the number one trending political issue.holt
franchesca ramsey
mitchell
franta
it is amplified by assad, who has waged one of the bloodiest, most terrible attacks on his own people
brownlee
ramos
salinas [through translator]
ramos [through translator]
salinas
tumulty
question [through translator]
smith
unknown [through translator
unknown
dickerson
cordes
cooney
obradovich
brit hume, fox news
let's meet the candidates
now let's introduce my colleagues
peter jennings, abc news
sen. john kerry, (d-ma) presidential candidate
jennings
howard dean, (d-vt) presidential candidate
i'm going to take a different position than everybody. i think we ought to get rid of the whole bush tax cut, and here's why
sen. joe lieberman, (d-ct) presidential candidate
hume
tom griffith, wmur
gen. weseley clark, (d) presidential candidate
griffith
clark
the democratic party is a party of ideas. it's a party as broad as a montana sky. we welcome everybody into this party, and we care about people. that's why i'm a democrat. that's why i want to be president
rep. dennis kucinich, (d-oh) presidential candidate
john distaso, union leader
sen. john edwards, (d-nc) presidential candidate
distaso
edwards
rev. al sharpton, (d) presidential candidate
as i've traveled all over the world, from the caribbean to africa to europe to the middle east, people need our trade and aid. they know we're a superpower. the question is
kerry
lieberman
i'm proposing to create a national health insurance pool from which — like the one that members of congress get our insurance from. and we would say this
kucinich
dean
second, find opportunities. for example, president musharraf said to me when i met with him
sharpton
i can pledge this to the american people
here's what i believe
but my real question for you is, and maybe you can hit this first
governor dean, let me ask you this
i will say for myself what i have said from the beginning
what we would do is suspend all the portions of the patriot act that have to do with search and seizure
now, with respect to what happened in iowa, let me state this
i would — and i voted for this in the senate. i would allow the safe importation of drugs, which means to have some basic standards to make sure — but when you're bringing in a prescription drug with a brand name that effectively is the same drug as people are paying so much money for here in the united states, that's going to send a message to the drug companies
i repeat
you asked a few minutes to joe lieberman — or joe was asked a few minutes ago about the prescription drug bill and what should be done. here's a perfect example of what goes on in washington every day
and third, i would make them tell us everything they're doing
which is why i have laid out a very clear set of proposals
but i repeat again
there are two questions. one is
and we deserve a president who understands what's really happening to people all across the country. the outsourcing of jobs
i hope we have a great economy next year because there's plenty to talk about
tom brokaw
brokaw
so the question is
what we do know is this
but i will say this
this administration did not have its priorities right, and the president, not the intelligence community, and not the previous administration, president george w. bush must be held accountable for that. that's the job of the president of the united states
but he went on to make clear what he meant, and he was right
and so, you know, my position
but here's what i can say to them
the problem is, this administration has only one plan
i have a message for them
i want to state this
we need to remember the first motto of this country
martha raddatz, moderator
raddatz
vice president joseph biden
representative paul ryan
ryan
biden
so will both of you level with the american people
they haven't put a credible solution on the table. he'll tell you about vouchers. he'll say all these things to try and scare people. here's what we're saying
it also gave more benefits. any senior out there, ask yourself
now they got a new plan
what we are saying is, lower tax rates across the board and close loopholes, primarily to the higher-income people. we have three bottom lines
the fact is, we went there for one reason
or remember when he said this
the choice is clear

the questions are mine, and i have not shared them with the candidates or their aides. the audience has taken a vow of silence
the controversy over what happened there continues. four americans are dead, including an american ambassador. questions remain of what happened
but i think it's important to step back and think about what happened in libya. now, keep in mind that i and americans took leadership in organizing an international coalition that made sure that we were able to—without putting troops on the ground, at the cost of less than what we spent in 2 weeks in iraq—liberate a country that had been under the yoke of dictatorship for 40 years, got rid of a despot who had killed americans. and as a consequence, despite this tragedy, you had tens of thousands of libyans, after the events in benghazi, marching and saying
the right course for us is to make sure that we go after the people who are leaders of these various anti-american groups and these jihadists, but also help the muslim world. and how do we do that? the group of arab scholars came together, organized by the u.n., to look at how we can help the world reject these terrorists. and the answer they came up with was this
but i can say this
but going back to libya, because this is an example of how we make choices
we need to have strong allies. our association and connection with our allies is essential to america's strength. we're the great nation that has allies
mr. schieffer. you're going to get a chance to respond to that because that's a perfect segue into our next segment, and that is, what is america's role in the world? and that is the question
and our military
it also allowed us to refocus on alliances and relationships that had been neglected for a decade. and, governor romney, our alliances have never been stronger
but what we also have been able to do is position ourselves so we can start rebuilding america. and that's what my plan does
the opportunities for us in latin america we have just not taken advantage of fully. as a matter of fact, latin america's economy is almost as big as the economy of china. we're all focused on china. latin america is a huge opportunity for us
let's talk about military spending, and that's this
mr. schieffer. a lot to cover. i'd like to move to the next segment
so the work that we've done with respect to sanctions now offers iran a choice
and one last thing, just to make this point
mr. schieffer. what if the prime minister of israel called you on the phone and said
the president. well, keep in mind, our strategy wasn't just going after bin laden. we've created partnerships throughout the region to deal with extremism
now, they look at us and say, is it a good idea to be with america? how strong are we going to be? how strong is our economy? they look at the fact that we owe them a trillion dollars and owe other people 16 trillion in total, including them. they look at our decision to cut back on our military capabilities
and governor romney wants to take us back to those policies
your question is one that's being asked by college kids all over this country. i was in pennsylvania with someone who had just graduated. this was in philadelphia, and she said
so what we have to do is two things. we have to make sure that we make it easier for kids to afford college and also make sure that when they get out of college there's a job. when i was governor of massachusetts, to get a high school degree you had to pass an exam. if you graduated in the top quarter of your class, we gave you a john and abigail adams scholarship
we've got to reduce our deficit, but we've got to do it in a balanced way, asking the wealthy to pay a little bit more along with cuts so that we can invest in education like yours. and let's take the money that we've been spending on war over the last decade to rebuild america
and one thing that the president said, which i want to make sure that we understand
the president. governor romney, here's what we did
the president. here's what happened
gov. romney. ——that taking advantage of our energy resources will bring back manufacturing to america. we're going to get through a very aggressive energy policy
number two, trade
number three, i'm going to get us to a balanced budget. president bush didn't. president obama was right
but the last point i want to make is this
the middle class is getting crushed under the policies of a president who has not understood what it takes to get the economy working again. he keeps saying, look, i've created 5 million jobs. that's after losing 5 million jobs. the entire record is such that the unemployment has not been reduced in this country. the unemployment, the number of people who are still looking for work, is still 23 million americans. there are more people in poverty
q. president. romney
the president. good, i look forward to it. was it lorena? lorraine. we are a nation of immigrants. i mean, we're just a few miles away from ellis island. we all understand what this country has become because talent from all around the world wants to come here
now, governor romney just said that he wants to help those young people too. but during the republican primary he said, i will veto the "dream act" that would allow these young people to have access. his main strategy during the republican primary was to say, we're going to encourage self-deportation
gov. romney. thank you, kerry, for your question. it's an important one, and i think the president just said correctly that the buck does stop at his desk, and he takes responsibility for that
syria
so we're going to make sure that people we trade with around the world play by the rules. but let me not just stop there. don't forget
ms. crowley. mr. president, we have a really short time for a quick discussion here
gov. romney. the answer is very straightforward
i believe governor romney is a good man, loves his family, cares about his faith. but i also believe that when he said, behind closed doors, that 47 percent of the country considered themselves victims, who refuse personal responsibility, think about who he was talking about
and the answer is, yes, we can help, but it's going to take a different path, not the one we've been on, not the one the president describes as a top-down, cut taxes for the rich; that's not what i'm going to do. my plan has five basic parts
now, i'm concerned that the path that we're on has just been unsuccessful. the president has a view very similar to the view he had when he ran 4 years ago
the second area, taxation. we agree we ought to bring the tax rates down, and i do
and finally, with regards to that tax cut, look, i'm not looking to cut massive taxes and to reduce the revenues going to the government. my number-one principle is there will be no tax cut that adds to the deficit. i want to underline that
now, i talked to a guy who has a very small business. he's in the electronics business in st. louis. he has four employees. he said he and his son calculated how much they pay in taxes
the president. jim, i—you may want to move on to another topic, but i would just say this to the american people
mr. lehrer. and the question is this
what things would i cut from spending? well, first of all, i will eliminate all programs by this test if they don't pass it
the president. when i walked into the oval office i had more than a trillion-dollar deficit greeting me, and we know where it came from
we went after medical fraud in medicare and medicaid very aggressively, more aggressively than ever before, and have saved tens of billions of dollars
now, we all know that we've got to do more, and so i put forward a specific $4 trillion deficit reduction plan. it's on a website; you can look at all the numbers
governor romney earlier mentioned the bowles-simpson commission. well, that's how the commission—bipartisan commission that talked about how we should move forward, suggested we have to do it
gov. romney. you said you'd cut the deficit in half. it's now 4 years later; we still have trillion-dollar deficits. the cbo says we'll have a trillion-dollar deficit each of the next 4 years. if you're reelected, we'll get to a trillion-dollar debt. but you have said before you'd cut the deficit in half. and this four—i love this idea of $4 trillion in cuts
but you know if we get that tax rate from 35 percent down to 25 percent, why, that $2.8 billion is on the table. of course, it's on the table. that's probably not going to survive if you get that rate down to 25 percent. but don't forget, you put $90 billion—like 50 years' worth of breaks—into solar and wind
so my approach is to say, how do we strengthen the system over the long term. and in medicare, what we did was, we said we are going to have to bring down the costs if we're going to deal with our long-term deficits, but to do that, let's look where some of the money is going
one last point i want to make
and the best course for health care is to do what we did in my state
and the question is this
the role of government
mr. lehrer. all right, let's go through some specifics in terms of what—how each of you views the role of government. how do—education
mr. lehrer. oh, well, no. but the fact is, government—the role of government and governing—we've lost a pod, in other words. so we only have 3 minutes left in the debate before we go to your closing statements. and so i want to ask, finally, here—and remember, we've got 3 minutes total time here. and the question is this
this is a—this is an important election, and i'm concerned about america. i'm concerned about the direction america has been taking over the last 4 years. i know this is bigger than an election about the two of us as individuals. it's bigger than our respective parties. it's an election about the course of america

brokaw
question
obama
mccain
but understand this
when you announce that you're going to launch an attack into another country, it's pretty obvious that you have the effect that it had in pakistan
and the question in this election is
thank you. brokaw
lehrer
but let's be clear
now, john mentioned the fact that business taxes on paper are high in this country, and he's absolutely right. here's the problem
so you may end up getting a $5,000 tax credit. here's the only problem
let's give every american a choice
now, look, we all would love to lower taxes on everybody. but here's the problem
and i saw that, and i saw the situation, and i stood up, and i voted against that, because i was afraid that they couldn't make peace in a place where 300 or 400 or several hundred marines would make a difference. tragically, i was right
on october 2, next thursday, also at 9
ifill
palin
biden
and let me just ask a rhetorical question
there -- with new technology, with tiny footprints even on land, it is safe to drill and we need to do more of that. but also in that "all of the above" approach that senator mccain supports, the alternative fuels will be tapped into
but here's the bottom line, gwen
we will change this policy with thoughtful, real, live diplomacy that understands that you must back israel in letting them negotiate, support their negotiation, and stand with them, not insist on policies like this administration has. ifill
the only authority the vice president has from the legislative standpoint is the vote, only when there is a tie vote. he has no authority relative to the congress. the idea he's part of the legislative branch is a bizarre notion invented by cheney to aggrandize the power of a unitary executive and look where it has gotten us. it has been very dangerous. ifill
schieffer
i will ask both of you
i think everybody understands at this point that we are experiencing the worst financial crisis since the great depression. and the financial rescue plan that sen. mccain and i supported is an important first step. and i pushed for some core principles
what the american people can't afford, though, is four more years of failed economic policies. and what they deserve over the next four weeks is that we talk about what's most pressing to them
the question is this
moderator
gore
member of audience
bush
lieberman
cheney
participants
moderator
page
pence
harris
welker
and we will begin with the fight against the coronavirus. president trump, the first question is for you. the country is heading into a dangerous new phase. more than 40,000 americans are in the hospital tonight with covid, including record numbers here in tennessee. and since the two of you last shared a stage, 16,000 americans have died from covid. so please be specific
trump
biden
wallace
participants
moderator
wallace
this debate is sponsored by the commission on presidential debates. the commission has designed the format
clinton
i have major disagreements with my opponent about these issues and others that will be before the supreme court. but i feel that at this point in our country's history, it is important that we not reverse marriage equality, that we not reverse roe v. wade, that we stand up against citizens united, we stand up for the rights of people in the workplace, that we stand up and basically say
trump
and, you know, look, i understand that donald's been strongly supported by the nra. the gun lobby's on his side. they're running millions of dollars of ads against me. and i regret that, because what i would like to see is for people to come together and say
you know, i've had the great honor of traveling across the world on behalf of our country. i've been to countries where governments either forced women to have abortions, like they used to do in china, or forced women to bear children, like they used to do in romania. and i can tell you
i have been for border security for years. i voted for border security in the united states senate. and my comprehensive immigration reform plan of course includes border security. but i want to put our resources where i think they're most needed
and donald knows a lot about this. he used undocumented labor to build the trump tower. he underpaid undocumented workers, and when they complained, he basically said what a lot of employers do
he has no respect for her. he has no respect for our president. and i'll tell you what
your running mate, governor pence, pledged on sunday that he and you—his words—"will absolutely accept the result of this election." today your daughter, ivanka, said the same thing. i want to ask you here on the stage tonight
while millions have already voted, election day, november 8th, is just 20 days away. one thing everyone here can agree on
quijano
kaine
i'll just say this
pence
but i have to tell you, i just — i was listening to the avalanche of insults coming out of senator kaine a minute ago. kaine
but there are other parts of the world that are challenging. let me tell you this
moderators
raddatz
cooper
question
when i hear something like that, i am reminded of what my friend, michelle obama, advised us all
holt
the 90-minute debate is divided into six segments, each 15 minutes long. we'll explore three topic areas tonight
i will invite you to applaud, however, at this moment, as we welcome the candidates
now, look, we have the worst revival of an economy since the great depression. and believe me
we are in a big, fat, ugly bubble. and we better be awfully careful. and we have a fed that's doing political things. this janet yellen of the fed. the fed is doing political—by keeping the interest rates at this level. and believe me
but i like to remember what michelle obama said in her amazing speech at our democratic national convention
let's talk about two important issues that were briefly mentioned by donald, first, nato. you know, nato as a military alliance has something called article 5, and basically it says this
and i will tell you this, lester
and i know donald's trying very hard to plant doubts about it, but i hope the people out there understand

senator, i want to set the stage for this discussion by asking the question that i think hangs over all of our politics today and is probably on the minds of many people watching this debate tonight, and that is
the measurement is not
so we can do a better job of homeland security. i can do a better job of waging a smarter, more effective war on terror and guarantee that we go after the terrorists. i will hunt them down, and we'll kill them. we'll capture them. we'll do what's ever necessary to be safe. but i pledge this to you, america
senator kerry. i'll tell you exactly how i can do it
president bush. well, his rhetoric doesn't match his record. he's been a senator for 20 years. he voted to increase taxes 98 times. when they tried to reduce taxes, he voted against that 127 times. he talks about being a fiscal conservative or fiscally sound, but he voted over—he voted 277 times to waive the budget caps, which would have cost the taxpayers $4.2 trillion. he talks about pay-go—i'll tell you what pay-go means when you're a senator from massachusetts, when you're a colleague of ted kennedy
the fact is that he's cut job training money. a billion dollars was cut. they only added a little bit back this year because it's an election year. they've cut the pell grants and the perkins loans to help kids be able to go to college. they've cut the training money. they've wound up not even extending unemployment benefits and not even extending health care to those people who are unemployed. i'm going to do those things because that's what right in america
what i'm saying is, is that as we promote life and promote a culture of life, surely there are ways we can work together to reduce the number of abortions
we also wanted medicare to be able to negotiate bulk purchasing. the va does that. the va provides lower cost drugs to our veterans. we could have done that in medicare. medicare is paid for by the american taxpayer. medicare belongs to you. medicare is for seniors who are— many of them—on fixed income, to lift them out of poverty. but rather than help you, the taxpayer, have lower cost, rather than help seniors have less expensive drugs, the president made it illegal—illegal—for medicare to actually go out and bargain for lower prices. result
president bush. two things
senator kerry. you don't measure it by a percentage increase. mr. president, you measure it by whether you're getting the job done. five hundred thousand kids lost after-school programs because of your budget. now, that's not in my gut. that's not my value system—and certainly not so that the wealthiest people in america can walk away with another tax cut
i've said it before; i say it again
let me just make it clear
tonight's format is going to be a bit different. we have assembled a townhall meeting. we're in the "show me" state, as everyone knows missouri to be, so missouri residents will ask the questions, these 140 citizens who were identified by the gallup organization as not yet committed in this election. now, earlier today each audience member gave me two questions on cards like this
he talks about a grand idea
the president stood right here in this hall 4 years ago, and he was asked a question by somebody just like you
president bush. that's an odd thing to say since we've tripled the homeland security budget from 10 to 30 billion dollars. listen, we'll do everything we can to protect the homeland. my opponent is right
other ways to make sure drugs are cheaper
and finally, he says he's going to have a novel health care plan. you know what it is? the federal government is going to run it. it is the largest increase in federal government health care ever, and it fits with his philosophy. that's why i told you about the award he won from the national journal. that's what liberals do
senator kerry. let me begin by saying that my health care plan is not what the president described. it is not a government takeover. you have choice
now, i'm going to restore what we did in the 1990s, ladies and gentlemen
i'm pledging i will not raise taxes. i'm giving a tax cut to the people earning less than $200,000 a year. now, for the people earning more than $200,000 a year, you are going to see a rollback to the level we were at with bill clinton, when people made a lot of money. and looking around here at this group here, i suspect there are only three people here who are going to be affected
president bush. let me start with how to control the costs of health care
president bush. let me make sure you understand my decision. those stem cell lines already existed. the embryo had already been destroyed prior to my decision. i had to make the decision
president bush. he complains about the fact our troops don't have adequate equipment, yet he voted against the $87 billion supplemental i sent to the congress and then issued one of the most amazing quotes in political history
saddam hussein was a risk to our country, ma'am. and he was a risk that—and this is where we just have a difference of opinion. the truth of the matter is, if you listen carefully
senator kerry. not necessarily be in power. but here's what i'll say about the 87 billion
tonight i had a chance to discuss with you what to do to keep this economy going
i have a better plan for homeland security. i have a better plan to be able to fight the war on terror
i'm proud that important military figures are supporting me in this race
my message to our troops is
senator kerry. secretary of state colin powell told this president the pottery barn rule
i will make a flat statement
now, prime minister allawi came here, and he said the terrorists are pouring over the border. that's allawi's assessment. the national intelligence assessment that was given to the president in july said
i know that for many of you sitting at home, parents of kids in iraq, you want to know, who is the person who could be a commander in chief who can get your kids home and get the job done and win the peace? and for all the rest of the parents in america who are wondering about their kids going to a school or anywhere else in the world, what kind of world they're going to grow up in, let me look you in the eye and say to you
ifill
the rules
cheney
edwards
our point in this is not complicated
he said that -- made mention of this global test. what john kerry said -- and it's just as clear as day to anybody who was listening -- he said
and we see the result of there not being a coalition
it's awfully hard to convey a sense of credibility to allies when you voted for the war and then you declared
we stood up and said
they have a plan for iraq too
that is not the way to win friends and allies. you're never going to add to the coalition with that kind of attitude. ifill
you've missed a lot of key votes
here's what's happened
and i want everyone to hear this, because there have been exaggerations made on the campaign trail
i want to read something you said four years ago at this very setting
(laughter) cheney
we have double-digit inflation in health care costs. we've seen the largest rise in medical costs in the last four years in the country's history
the threats we face
here are the judgments i would make
we want to raise the active-duty forces by 40,000, double the special forces so we can find terrorists where they are, and provide the kind of support for families -- health care, housing -- that they deserve while their loved ones are serving and protecting us. ifill
he is ready to be commander in chief. ifill
now, flip-flops
they said that they were going to do something about health care in this country. and they've done something
this president said -- i listened to him the other night at his 2000 debate saying
here's the truth
a reminder
